So yeah, there's other notes in the video
but the kind of the one other major thing
that I think it's tricky like,
do you need to write a plugin tomorrow?
No, you do not need to
write a plugin tomorrow.
When you know that you need to,
is it nice to know that you can write?
Yes, and writing a plug in is one of those
things that particularly in Vite, it's
a little gnarly because Vite is like a set
of extra abstractions over Rollup plugins.
So one kind of needs to read both docs,
and there are a shocking
number of like hooks that most
of which you do not need, right?
And the reason that you need to build
a plugin will be, in your heart of hearts,
when you need a plugin and
amongst all of the rollup plugins and
all of the Vite plugins,
the plugin you need does not exist.
What you need to do will be so specific,
we're gonna go over the general
high level piece, but there are,
if we looked at like awesome Vite and
awesome Rollup,
there are hundreds of plugins, right?
So by the time you've exhausted all
of the community plugins and none of
them do what you want, you are a little
bit in terra incognita at that point.
But we will kinda talk about like just
some basic examples that we can use.
And sometimes like there's
little niceties, right,
that you can add to your own development
experience that are somewhat helpful,
and I think that there's a lot
of value in that as well.
The nice part about a Vite plugin is
effectively it's just a function, right?
It's just a function that
conforms to a certain shape,
but beyond that it's not like
really like some real crazy magic.
And there are some conventions
I think are interesting.
The plugins we've seen so far, like React,
that's just basically taking probably,
it might just be JSX, I'm pretty
sure it'll take any JavaScript file,
cuz React has always been a little
loosey-goosey on whether or
not you have to do a .jsx or
a .js and either will work.
But basically, you say,
when you have a plugin, effectively,
every single module that you import is
flowing through that function, right?
The plugin is just a function,
every module flows through it.
There are lots of these different hooks,
you can do, okay,
we're about to finish the build.
Okay, I've just got the what
are we trying to import?
Okay, we're about to load the file from
the file system, you could go in there and
hot swap it with something else.
There's a transform hook which is
like we've parsed it into an AST and
now I wanna mutate the AST, right?
There are various points in the process
in the lifecycle of your code going from
file-on-file system to build a thing where
you can interject your thought process and
say, I would like to do something now,
right?
And we saw before, that could be run
it through sharp, which is what Vite image
tools did, which is the ability to
resize the image, so on and so forth.
The React plug-in is simply taking it and
saying, okay,
I wanna run it through the JSX parser.
Whether that's SWC or Babel, or
depending on the plugin you're using,
something in the way that's
always been done, right?
We could say, hey, if this ends in .yaml,
I just wanna take a any of
the libraries that will translate YAML
into JSON, and take the YAML file,
shove it in there, and
spit me out JSON file, right, anything.
If you have a bespoke file
type at your company and
you have some library to parse it,
right, you could theoretically parse
it into a JavaScript object and then be
able to have it and access it, right?
And one of the conventions I do think
is kinda cool, though, is a term from
Rollup but Vite is taking its bundling
from Rollup called virtual modules.
What is a virtual module?
Virtual module is this idea of, it's not
actually on your file system, right?
It is a file that doesn't really exist,
but then you can import it and use it and
your plugin will go, you gonna try to
Import whatever from virtual colon,
and the virtual is optional but
like let's say virtual is the convention,
virtual colon, whatever it's called.
You say like, Vite's like, okay, I'm gonna
go try to resolve this module you go, hey,
virtual colon workspace,
which is one that I have in the code base,
I'll just show you in a second.
It will say like let me let me tell you
what the file system would have told you.
Don't read the file system, I'm going
to give you the contents of a file and
you deal with it.
I should show you, I showed you in
the development version of the website.
I have this open in Visual Studio code so
I can like click on any
given file as I'm like working
on this course and see it.
And then as I'm reading through it,
like, I see typo, I can go and
just hit this button and opens that file,
and just to make my life easier.
And so, here is the plugin, right?
That is a use case I'm using for
a virtual module.
And so, I have this module
called virtual:workspace.
And all it really does is it's giving
me the directory that this project is
based out of, right?
And so, if you look at this link,
it's really small down there,
it's vscode://file on my file system,
and that's what it does.
But I need to know the first part
of that file path, right, or
actually, a lot of it.
So what it allows me to do
is I can kind of go and
there is no virtual:workspace
in my project.
But when Vite says,
we're importing something from
virtual:workspace I step in with
that load hook there and I say, yo,
if you are virtual:workspace,
don't load anything from the file system.
Don't even go looking for
anything from the file system, right?
What I want you to do is I literally
just give it a string of JavaScript that
I wanted to pretend this is what you
found on the file system, right?
And so
in this case when the project loads,
this gives me the path of
the actual project itself.
And I basically say, hey,
if you're the one we're looking for,
go ahead and pull this one.
There's a \0 in here,
let's pull it up in the real code.
No, that one, I'll find it for
you in a second.
There's a \0 here, it's just I think
got stripped out of the rendered file,
we'll grab it in a second.
And that's just a convention that is
like totally not a valid module name
that tells the rest of Rollup
ignore this thing, right?
It's a totally bogus one, but
then I don't have to type it.
And so we turn it into that so that every
other plugin will ignore it and we'll say,
hey, if you're the module I'm looking for,
never load it from the file system, right,
give it this file.
You could write this in another file,
for me it's a one-liner where it just
basically gives me a function
that takes the current file and
prefixes it wherever this project
is on my file system, right?
And you can do this for
a whole bunch of things.
We had a request in our app where we
have a bunch of companies who have
sensitive data, and we are technically
an open source app, and we actually,
on our server, encrypt all their data,
but they can look it in the UI.
So what they want to do is they
wanted some way to know what SHA of
the UI that we had.
So in case somebody from security wanted
to audit the code to make sure we weren't
secretly waiting for it to render
on the DOM and report it back,
they could see what SHA was and
audit the code.
And so I could theoretically
have a virtual:gitSha, right,
that would then get the latest commit,
right?
Even at build time, right,
when you go to the GitHub actions, and
then interpolate it into my application,
even though that's not written on
the file system anywhere, right?
And so, the nice part about this plugin
is that it is very small, all right?
It is effectively we've got the name of
this, we are just kind of resolving the ID
instead of looking for
it in the file system or
anything like that to one that like
it is known shouldn't be anywhere.
And then I am basically saying this is
what you would have found on the file
system, right?
And there's a whole bunch of other ones
that you can do like wire two together,
there's a Million markdown plugins for
Vite, right?
We'll write one real quick cuz I think it
will demonstrate how this works, and then
maybe do one to inline critical CSS if we
needed to, or something along those lines.
Just to kind of demonstrate what
these things will look like.
So, which one are we more interested in?
You wanna do a markdown?
Yeah, there's nodding.
Cool, let's do the markdown one,
and take a look at that.
And just see that,
they are not that scary.
And again, whatever use case you need,
will probably be somewhat esoteric.
But then I was just annoyed by switching
back and forth between my browser and
my code editor and jumping to the right
file as I was working on this, so
I wrote this plugin.
But then I was thinking to myself, it
would be cool if in my app, since you can
see both the module you're importing and
the importing module everywhere.
I could even in development have, if I
double click or shift click open any given
component in my app, that component
jumped directly to that file, right?
There's little things, not to say you
should do all these things you like, but
there's little things you can add
depending on your use case that you
might need.
The virtual modules are cool if you use
something like contentful and you have
your data in a CMS somewhere and you
wanna just pull it at build time, right?
That's another option, right,
that you can go for and do that as well.
There's a bunch of, it's one of those
things where it's just most of the common
cases that you can think off the top of
your head, somebody did think of that and
there's a plug in.
But for the very unique case that you will
come across at some point in the next
year, two years, whatever,
it's a powerful pattern.
And we'll go through some basic ones just
to show that it's not nearly as scary as
you think it is, right?
You can make a scary,
you can get very involved,
I'm sure that image tools one
is a pretty large plugin.
But for most of the little things that you
might need to do that like make your life
easier, and this is kind of like Act four
"Vite is extensible",
it's pretty straightforward.